---
layout: post
title: Announcing the launch of vocab!
---

I am pleased to announce that my command line utitlity
[`vocab`](https://github.com/daltyboy11/vocab) is available on github and ready
for use by the community! 

`vocab` is a tool to help you expand your vocabulary, designed with simplicity in
mind.

# Motivation
Being an avid reader of non fiction I often come across words I don't know.
Sometimes I can infer the meaning of an unknown word from its context and
sometimes I can't. When I can't, I'm forced to pause my reading and look it up.
Sometimes the word will come up a second time and I've already forgot its
meaning! I want to better remember those words so I can expand my vocabulary
and not be forced to interrupt my reading flow.

Being a developer I spend a lot of my computer time in the terminal. I created
`vocab` as a flashcard-like vocabulary tool for the terminal designed with
simplicity in mind. The goal of `vocab` is to help the user remember words they
want to remember. Implementation details below!

# Implementation Details
This section will describe the inner workings of vocab such as data
persistence, how it selects words for a practice session, and functional
programming techniques that were used. If you haven't read `vocab`'s
[README](https://github.com/daltyboy11/vocab)
please do that before reading this section.

## Data Persistence
Word and practice session data are stored in CSV files on your machine.
The path to these files is OS dependent and I used the
[directories-jvm](https://github.com/soc/directories-jvm) project to abstract
that away from my program.

## Ad-hoc polymorphism for converting a data object to its CSV representation
Ad-hoc polymorphism is a technique for adding functionality to types on the fly
as an alternative to subclassing. In scala the _type class_ pattern is one
technique to achieve ad-hoc polymorphism. Let's see how type classes are used in
`vocab` to achieve ad-hoc polymorphism.

There are two main case classes in vocab representing the data model:

```scala
case class Word(
  word: String,
  definition: String,
  partOfSpeech: Option[SpeechPart],
  numTimesPracticed: Int
)

case class PracticeSession(
  sessionType: PracticeSessionType,
  numWords: Int, 
  duration: Int,
  timestamp: Int,
  didFinish: Boolean 
)
```

Before writing `Word` and `PracticeSession` objects to the storage files they
need to be converted to comma separated values. Using scala's implicits we can
wrap `Word` and `PracticeSession` objects in objects with types that provide
this behavior:

```scala
sealed trait ToCSVRepr {
  // A comma separated value representation of the implementing class
  def toCSVRepr(): String
}

// A wrapper class for converting a word to its CSV representation
implicit class WordToCSVRepr(word: Word) extends ToCSVRepr {
  def toCSVRepr: String = ???
}

// A wrapper class for converting a practice session to its CSV representation
implicit class PracticeSessionToCSVRepr(practiceSession: PracticeSession) extends ToCSVRepr {
  def toCSVRepr: String = ???
}
```

We've defined an two implicit classes, one to wrap `Word`s and one to wrap
`PracticeSession`'s and now we can call `toCSVRepr` directly on `Word` and
`PracticeSession` objects, even though `toCSVRepr` isn't defined in those
classes!

### Using Phantom Types To Make The Application Class Safer
Phantom types are useful for enforcing an ordering in a workflow. We can tell
the compiler to only allow certain actions to occur in a specific order.

There are two distinct steps in running the `vocab` application:

1. Interpreting the command line arguments
2. Running the provided command

The steps are encapsulated in functions called on an instance of the
`Application` class. 

```scala
// Parses the command line arguments
def parseArgs(...) = ???

// Runs the command generated from command line parsing
def runCommand(...) = ???
```

It obviously doesn't make sense to call `runCommand` before calling `parseArgs`.
We can tell the compiler to make an invalid ordering like this **impossible**
using phantom types.

Let's define a trait for each state of the Application: parsing the arguments,
running the command, and being done:

```scala
object Application {
  sealed trait State
  object State {
    sealed trait ParseArgs extends State
    sealed trait RunCommand extends State
    sealed trait PostCommand extends State
  }
}
```

Now let's make the `Application` class generic and impose the restriction that
the type parameter **must** be a subtype of `Application.State`:

```scala
case class Application[S <: Application.State](...) { ... }
```

Using the concept of *implicit evidence* we tell the compiler that
methods defined on `Application` can only be called for certain subtypes of `S`.

```scala
// Application must be in ParseArgs state to call this method
def parseArgs(args: Seq[String])(implicit ev: S =:= ParseArgs): Application[RunCommand]

// Application must be in RunCommand state to call this method
def runCommand(implicit ev: S =:= RunCommand): Application[PostCommand]
```

This tells the compiler that `parseArgs` can only be called on Applications in
the `ParseArgs` state and `runCommand` can only be called on Applications in the
`RunCommand` state.

Trying to call `runCommand` before `parseArgs` would yield the following
error:

```
> val app = Application[Application.State.ParseArgs]()
> app.runCommand

Cannot prove that application.Application.State.ParseArgs =:= application.Application.State.RunCommand.
```

While this example is almost trivial, enforcing an ordering on method calls
could add a great deal of safety for a complex application with many states.

# Reflection
The project's first realease has 6,332 lines of code (LOC) written and
4,035 LOC removed. Roughly 2 lines of code were removed for every 3 written!
I attribute this to a lot of unnecessary complexity and over-engineering in
the beginning that I eventually removed and refactored. I think I started
planning and generalizing the application for use cases that were never going to 
exist. Once I fleshed out a reasonable feature set and stuck to implementing
**only** that feature set I was no longer over-engineering or over-generalizing.

## Functional handling of side effects
[Cats](https://typelevel.org/cats-effect/datatypes/io.html) and
[Scalaz](https://github.com/scalaz/ioeffect) offer datatypes for handling side
effects and I'm aware there is a great benefit to using IO monads for your
program's input/ouput. This is something I hope to understand better in the
future but I prioritized launching the project over learning how to work with
side effect mondas because I was eager to start using `vocab` myself!

## Manually reading/writing CSV files
CSV reading and writing is a solved problem and there are many libraries
available. I wrote my own as an exercise in understanding the type class
pattern, which I'm happy to say I'm now comfortable with.

## Manually Parsing Command Line Arguments
`vocab` was a simple enough program for this to be tenable but I really should
invest time into learning how to use a solid argument parsing framework. I
recently discoverd [scopt](https://github.com/scopt/scopt) and it looks
promising. I will definitely use a third party argument parsing framework next
time I build a command line utility.
